8 Reasons MIDI is Still Alive and Kicking

Advertisement
by Adrian Try16 Jul 2009
Length:ShortLanguages:[English]
GeneralReason
“Is MIDI dead?” The question seems to be echoed from forum to forum. MIDI was
invented in the early 80s just after I got into music. Back then keyboards were
primitive, the personal computer had just been invented, and 640K was enough
RAM for anyone. MIDI was a solution that fit like a glove in that world. You
might be surprised people are still using it today.

And yet it seems that MIDI is everywhere you look in music recording. We use it
in ways that the original engineers never dreamed of or intended, and it looks
like MIDI is here to stay. Even if you’re part of the “I don’t do MIDI
sequencing – I’m a real musician” club, MIDI may still form a key part of your
setup.

What makes MIDI so unique and useful?

1. MIDI lets different pieces of hardware and software work together

MIDI is the “musical instrument digital interface”. It was primarily designed
to connect different pieces of hardware together. Back then you would use it to
interconnect two or three keyboards and a drum machine with your Roland MC500
sequencer. It was a standard, so worked with all brand names, and seemed like
magic.

MIDI is still used to connect hardware today, though you’re more likely to use
a USB lead to connect your keyboard to your computer for reasons of speed and
reduced latency. I still use MIDI leads to connect various digital instruments
and sound modules to my controller keyboard.

And these days MIDI timing codes also allow different software programs to
communicate together and work as one, allowing your recording software to start
external hardware playing, as well as other software programs, for example a
drum machine application. This is just one example of how the use of MIDI has
been extended.

2. MIDI lets you play and record music using a wide variety of controllers

MIDI separates the sound from the instrument you are playing, allowing you to
use a variety of controllers to make music. Weighted keyboards, unweighted
keyboards, electronic percussion instruments, MIDI wind instruments and guitar
controllers are all available. In addition, MIDI allows you to use external
control surfaces with knobs and sliders to do your mixing with. The variety of
controllers allow you many options for playing with different feeling and
expression.

3. MIDI files are small

There was a shortage of memory and disk space when MIDI was created. The first
IBM hard drives were only 5 MB, and space was at a premium. Recording audio
wasn’t yet an option, either in terms of storage or processing power. In
comparison, MIDI files were fast, tiny, and appropriate.

During the 90s I used MIDI extensively. My small 95 MHz Toshiba Libretto with
only 16 MB of RAM was a perfect and portable MIDI sequencer. I took it with me
everywhere, and sat it on top of the weighted MIDI keyboards I was playing.
Despite the low specs of the computer, it never skipped a beat.

In these days of terabyte drives, the small size of a MIDI file seems like
overkill, and it is certainly not as important as it once was. For many years
MIDI music has been used on websites (unfortunately), game cartridges, and
mobile phones, but even in these areas larger WAV and MP3 files are now
acceptable. The small file size is refreshing rather than essential. While
recording, source audio files can become huge, and anything that can keep the
size down is welcome.

4. MIDI has been extended

One thing that has kept MIDI alive and relevant is that it keeps getting
extended. In the early days of electronic keyboards, there was no standard
patch mapping of instrument sounds. Sound 25 may have been piano on one
keyboard, and pads on another. That made things difficult when you swapped
things around – whether you sent your latest MIDI file to a friend with a
different keyboard, or just replaced a keyboard or module in your rack with
another. The lack of standardization often brought unexpected results.

In 1991, the MIDI standard was extended to become the General MIDI standard.
The main change was to standardize 128 patches, so that the instruments on one
keyboard would match those on another exactly. This made MIDI more useful –
standard MIDI files could be swapped between users, and now many thousands
(millions?) are available online.

In time General MIDI was extended to the GS and XG “standards” by Roland and
Yamaha respectively, both of whom added additional instruments and effects to
the standard.

5. MIDI sequencing

MIDI sequencing is not the same as recording sounds. A sequencer records which
notes were played, how hard or fast they were hit, and how long they were held.
It’s the modern equivalent of a pianola roll. To hear the music played, you
need an instrument to play back what was recorded.

But even though it’s not really recording, it achieves essentially the same
thing when it comes to electronic instruments, making it a good starting point
for those getting into recording – especially those with old or low-spec
computers. And MIDI’s extra flexibility makes it worth considering for many
professional applications as well.

6. MIDI is flexible

MIDI sequencing is more flexible than recording in many ways. Here are three of
them:

 1. With MIDI sequencing, you don’t have to decide on the sounds before you
    record. After you have recorded your piece, it is very simple to change the
    sound to something completely different.
 2. If the timing of your playing is a little sloppy, you can quantize a track
    or region so that it plays perfectly in time.
 3. If there are minor errors in your playing, or you change your mind about
    the timing or pitch of one note, you can make adjustments with your mouse
    without having to record the track again.

7. MIDI plays soundfonts

In the old days, to play back a MIDI sequence you had to connect your computer
to a multi-timbral keyboard or sound module. These days all of that can be done
using software. There are thousands of soundfonts containing rich instrumental
or artificial sounds, some free, and others costing many thousands of dollars.
There is a universe of virtual sounds waiting for you to explore.

8. MIDI makes notation easy

Finally, because a standard MIDI file contains the pitch and duration of each
note, it is relatively easy for a software program to display this as standard
music notation. Many sequencing and digital recording programs are capable of
displaying music in this way, or you can use a dedicated notation application
if you are serious about printing sheet music professionally.

Now it’s over to you. Is MIDI dead or alive in your studio? How do you use
MIDI, and are you a fan?

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Why MIDI Matters

Getting Started with MIDI Tutorials
The MIDI Association
Screen-Shot-2018-04-11-at-5.05.10-PM

MIDI is like air, it's all around you, most of the time you can take it for
granted, but if you are a digital musician you probably couldn't live with out
it. MIDI is inside musical instruments, computers, tablets, smart phones, stage
lighting, audio mixers, and many other products from well-known international
companies including Apple, Gibson, Google, Korg, Microsoft, Roland, Yamaha, and
hundreds more. By the fall of 2015, it's projected that they will be around 2.6
billion devices on the planet that are MIDI enabled!

MIDI is almost always an integral part of the modern recording process for
popular music and the music that is made for films, TV, and even video games.
MIDI-equipped electronic keyboards are connected to computers and mobile
devices running Digital Audio workstation software that record both MIDI and
Audio to produce music. With advances in computing power making digital
software based instruments sound ever more realistic, the music you hear on TV,
in radio ads and in movies is often recordings of MIDI instruments (both
hardware instruments and virtual "soft synth" software rather than of dozens of
acoustic instruments. Even the huge orchestral score playing behind that
big-screen block buster almost always starts off as a MIDI mockup arrangement
and then the composer uses MIDI to transcribe the parts into music notation.

More and more DJ gear has MIDI integrated into it and the last few years has
seen a dramatic rise in the number of unique DJ MIDI controllers and
controllerists- artists like Moldover that use MIDI to manipulate sound and
loops via MIDI controllers.

Types of MIDI

MIDI technology has been around for more than 30 years, and first appeared in
the form of a special 5-Pin DIN connector on the back of a keyboard that is
used to connect to another keyboard or to a computer. Though 5-pin DIN
connections are still used for making connections between standalone hardware
digital instruments, over the years as computer technology had developed and
advanced so has MIDI.

Your computer, tablet, or smart phone probably has MIDI capabilities and
starting in 2015, the web browser you are using to view this page may be
capable of making music with MIDI. Google's Chrome browser (and others to
follow) can access local MIDI devices (hardware and software synthesizers,
external keyboards, etc.) and use them for producing music and/or for
controlling objects in the browser (such as a browser-based synthesizer).Web
app developers are rapidly adding

MIDI support to existing apps and creating new apps that are Web-MIDI enabled.

If you own an iPad or iPhone you probably know that there are hundreds of 
programs you can get for making music (even on-the-go) that use Apple's
CoreMIDI technology to connect to MIDI devices.CoreMIDI also allows an iPad/
iPhone to send/receive MIDI messages via Wi-Fi allowing the iPad/iPhone to
control and/or play sounds and sequences on the Mac, and vice-versa.CoreMIDI
also supports MIDI connections via USB, Ethernet, and FireWire (where
equipped). Windows users can also connect to Macs and iOS devices via a third
party RTP-MIDI.

With Android M, Google has added robust MIDI support for the billions of
Android devices that are available making MIDI one of the most ubiquitous
technologies on the planet.

Of course, MIDI is not just for keyboards... other MIDI-equipped musical
instruments include digital drums, guitars, wind instruments, and more. For
electronic dance music (EDM) and DJs, there are specialized controllers that
use MIDI to trigger beats and loops, and to control lighting. And new kinds of
digital musical instruments and controllers are being invented all the time,
all of which integrate perfectly with existing instruments and devices because
of MIDI.

Besides music creation, MIDI has some other interesting and popular uses. MIDI
Show Control is a set of MIDI messages used for controlling lights and rides at
theme parks as well as for operating themed events such as are found outside
many Las Vegas casinos. And MIDI Machine Control provides remote transport
control for many kinds of audio/video recording devices. Moreover, because MIDI
is widely available and free to use, many people are able to develop unique DYI
products using MIDI to control and/or generate sound... in all kinds of shapes
and forms.

If you'd like to learn more about the amazingly diverse world of MIDI, this is
the place as the site has videos, tutorials, forums and stories about MIDI
artists.So join the community of people who make music and art with MIDI and
learn how to get the most out of this incredibly flexible technology. 

Tweet
Share on Pinterest
1
Google Web Audio/MIDI Hackathon at Music China 201...
MIDI History:Chapter 6-MIDI Is Born ...

About the author

The MIDI Association

The MIDI Association

    

THE MIDI ASSOCIATION (TMA)
The community of people who work, play and create with MIDI The MIDI
Association’s mission is to nurture an inclusive global community of people who
create music and art with MIDI. The www.MIDI.org website is the central
repository of information about anything related to MIDI technology, from
classic legacy gear to next- gen protocols on the horizon.

Author's recent posts

More posts from author
Sunday, 01 September 2019 The Cloud Piano by David Bowen
Sunday, 01 September 2019 Blokas Midihub Standalone MIDI Processor & Router
Sunday, 01 September 2019 Ólafur Arnalds' MIDI Generative effects and Pianos
that go Bleep Bloop
 

(C) 2019 MIDI Manufacturers Association (MMA)

  • About the MMA
  • MIDI Trademark Policies
  • MMA IP Policy
  • Join the MMA
  • 
     1. Request a SysEx ID
  • Pay MMA Dues & ID Fees

Quick Links

  • Contact Us -- We'd love to hear from you
  • Tutorials
  • MIDI/Audio Jobs Board
  • 

 
 
Privacy Policy | Terms of Use
